I said to McDermott, "I didn't
think you were gonna do it that minute."
He said it was better to get it done with.
Then he came to me and said,
"Open the trap door
and I'll throw her down the cellar."
I refused to do so, being frightened.
He presently came to me and said
he had thrown her down the cellar...
I asked him what for.
He said,
"Never mind, she's not dead yet."
I gave him a piece of white cloth
and followed him to the trap door.
I saw the body lying
at the foot of the stairs...
"Nancy was
on the cellar floor, barely alive.
I turned to Grace.
Her livid face was even more dreadful
than that of the unfortunate woman.
She uttered no cry, but she put her hand
to her head, and said..."
-God has damned me for this.
-Then you have nothing more to fear.
Give me that handkerchief off your neck.
"She gave it to me without a word.
I tied the handkerchief round her throat
in a single tie,
...giving Grace one end to hold,
while I drew the other tight enough
to finish my terrible work.
Her eyes literally started from her head.
She gave one groan, and all was over.
I then cut the body in four pieces
and turned a large washtub over on them."
I feel I have not learned anything
other than that I have not yet
learned anything.
Yes. She does challenge
a man's mental capacities.
What part of her story
is she telling you now?
-We are approaching the center.
-The center?
We are retracing, day by day,
hour by hour,
the events which immediately
preceded the murders.
Anything she says now could be a clue.
Any gesture, any twitch.
She knows.
She might not know she knows, but...
buried deep within her,
the knowledge is there.
Then you can't afford to lose
hold of the thread you've been following.
Find a new living situation.
I beg your pardon, Reverend?
If it becomes known that you are living
alone with your landlady,
your reputation...
The Tories are merciless
in the persecution of their enemies
and were all for hanging her.
I have been somewhat preoccupied.
Doctor?
Something she...
something I'm on the verge of remembering.
And I... There is something she said
about a whisper...
and a man in the night.
I'm trying to remember.
Get some sleep, Dr. Jordan.
What is it?
Dr. Jordan, I am so sorry to disturb you,
but I heard a noise.
I didn't hear any...
This must stop.
Nothing is going on so nothing can stop.
Grace, would you be so kind as to serve
more tea when the presentation is over?
I suppose they want their tea served
to them by a celebrated murderess.
You ought to have been cut into slabs
by the doctors
like butchers dressing a carcass.
What was left they'd do in a bundle,
just like a suet pudding,
and left to molder in a dishonored grave.
Dora, please don't talk
to our Grace that way.
I suppose she's afraid of me.
When people are afraid,
they often behave with cruelty.
You don't seem afraid of me, Clarrie.
Afraid of you for rising up
against your master?
Miss Grace,
where do you think I come from?
The young doctor is teaching them all
what he knows out there.
I know more about him
than you would think.
What do you mean?
He likes his things tidy
and he's willing to pay for it.
So I did some work
at his landlady's house yesterday.
Her husband ran off on her, and he seems
to be taking fine care of her.
What sort of woman is she?
She has a wild rolling to the eye
and a twitchy manner.
And those two things together always mean
warm work behind closed doors.
Dr. Jordan better watch himself,
because if I ever saw a determination
to get a man's trousers off him,
it's there in her eyes.
That is quite coarse.
I think it is coarse and unnatural
that they take breakfast together now.
They do?
How to measure the effects of shock.
How to diagnose amnesia with no
discernible physical manifestations
or certain inexplicable and radical parts
of the personality.
There are those who have dedicated
themselves to the study of hysterics
and the investigation of dreams
as a key to diagnosis,
and their relation to amnesia,
which I myself hope in time
to make a modest contribution.
I must confess, the last few weeks
have shaken my confidence
in the ability of...
even the most experienced doctor
to make the connection between
dreams and diagnosis.
Thank you so much, Dr. Jordan.
My pleasure.
Illuminating, but somewhat contentious.
I'm not certain there is room for the soul
in your theory.
And that could be dangerous.
-They'll be wanting more tea soon.
-It will be a moment.
Oh, Dr. Jordan, I would like to introduce
you to Dr. Jerome DuPont.
It is a pleasure, Doctor.
-Pleasure.
-And might I say, your lecture
was... very interesting.
There's a voice out there
that sounds familiar.
The man that Dr. Jordan is talking to,
has he been to the house before?
I've never seen him before.
A strange one.
And how is your fair patient,
if I may call her that?
Are you making any progress?
Nothing definitive.
There are several possible lines
of enquiry I hope to follow up.
Well, I would be honored if you would
permit me to use my own method.
As a sort of experiment.
A demonstration, if you like.
I am at a crucial point.
It might upset her
and undo weeks of careful preparation.
At your convenience, of course.
I expect to stay here for another month
and I would be very happy to be of help.
We all feel,
all of us on the committee,
that it would be to our advantage to do
whatever we can to move things along.
I myself am a spiritualist.
We often have evening seances.
- They may be useful.
- No.
I need a little more time.
Too much meddling will ruin everything.
But could Dr. DuPont just attempt one
session of neuro-hypnosis with Miss Marks?
On behalf of the committee.
-Surely, you would have no objection--
-Please.
Give me more time.
Grace.
Grace. Grace.
Some water, please!
- Can we have some water?
- Grace.
Hey.
It's Dr. Jordan.
Are you alright, Grace?
Hello, Grace.
Jere...
I could have laughed with glee,
for Jeremiah had done a conjuring trick,
as surely as if he'd pulled a coin from
my ear, or made believe to swallow a fork.
I'm so sorry. I've dropped all the cakes.
Try to be still, Grace.
And just as he used to do such tricks
in full view,
with everyone looking on
but unable to detect him,
-he had done the same here...
-Miss Marks.
-...and they were none the wiser.
-How do you do?
She's often startled by strangers,
aren't you, Grace?
Dr. DuPont is a friend.
He won't hurt you.
Jerome DuPont.
A medical practitioner.
I must look into her eyes.
It's often the best indication
as to whether or not the procedure
will be efficacious.
Good. Good, very good.
Grace, have you ever been hypnotized?
Please.
Let her recover from her fainting spell.
I should certainly hope not, sir.
I do not even know rightly
what being hypnotized is.
It is an entirely scientific procedure.
Would you be willing to try it?
If it would help your friends,
the committee,
if it were decided by them
that you should.
I'll do everything in my power, sir,
if that's what is wanted.
Good, very good,
but if this is going to work,
you must repose your trust in me.
Do you think you can do that, Grace?
I will try, sir.
I think she's had enough
excitement for one day.
Care must be taken for Grace's nerves.
They're delicate and must not be damaged.
Of course, of course.
We should do this another day.
Thank you.
The next day I was to tell you
about the day
Nancy Montgomery
and Thomas Kinnear were murdered.
I sat up and I thought to myself,
what should I tell Dr. Jordan
about this day?
We are almost there.
I went to the pump, and on turning around,
I saw McDermott dragging Nancy...
I remember what the lawyer, Mr. Mackenzie,
said I should say,
and what I said at the trial.
He presently came to me and said
he had thrown her down the cellar
and wanted a handkerchief.
I asked him what for...
And what I did not say even to him,
and what I said afterwards,
which was different as well.
And what the others said.
Did she say...
Don't think I don't know
what you've been up to.
I will pay you on Saturday
and then you can be gone out of here
and that will be the end of it
and good riddance.
Was I crying?
-Did he say....
-Grace...
why are you crying?
I wish she was dead.
Surely I did not say that.
Or not out loud.
Did I push him away?
-Did he say...
-I will soon make you think better of me.
I will tell you a secret
if you promise to keep it.
And if you do not,
your life will not be worth a straw.
It might have happened.
- Did he say...
- I know you're hiding from me.
Come out at once or I'll have to find you
and catch you,
and once I've got ahold of you,
who knows what I will do?
You never obey me, you never listen to me,
you never do as I say, you dirty girl.
-Did he say...
-Now you will have to be punished.
It might have happened.
You must unlock the door, you must
open the window, you must let me in.
Let... me... in.
Let me in. Open the window. Let me in.
Today I must go on with the story.
Or the story must go on with me,
carrying me inside it,
along the track it must travel,
straight to the end,
weeping like a train, and deaf
and single-eyed and locked tight shut,
although I hurl myself against the walls
of it and scream and cry
and beg God himself to let me out.
I said to McDermott, "I didn't think you
were gonna do it that minute..."
The witness was acquainted
with the deceased.
...claims that the last time
he saw Thomas Kinnear alive
was on the morning of...
-Good morning, Grace.
-Good morning, Dr. Jordan.
Should we pick up where we left off?
Today is the day I must talk about...
I must tell what I did or didn't do.
It is not the question of your guilt
or innocence that concerns me.
I'm a doctor, not a judge.
I simply wish to know what you yourself
can actually remember.
Nobody has cared about that before, sir.
They told me I must be lying.
They kept wanting to know more.
Except for the lawyer, Kenneth Mackenzie.
But I'm sure that even he
did not believe me.
I will believe you.
Mr. Kinnear left for the city
on Thursday, did he not?
-Yes, sir.
-At three o'clock, on horseback?
In his one-horse wagon.
But yes, that was the exact time, sir.
He was to be back on the Friday.
Here's your favorite beau, Grace.
Come kiss him goodbye.
Meaning James McDermott?
But McDermott wasn't going anywhere.
He meant the horse, sir.
He knew I was very fond of Charley.
Grace, stop dawdling!
You're not paid to socialize.
Did Mr. Kinnear make improper advances
to you, Grace?
I don't know what you mean
by improper, sir.
He never used foul language to me.
Did he touch you?
Did he take liberties?
-Only what was usual, sir.
-Usual?
With a servant, sir.
He was kind
and liberal when he wished to be.
Did he put his hands under your clothing?
Were you lying down?
I've heard enough of that kind of talk.
You're just like them at the asylum
with their filthy ideas!
-I don't have to stay here.
-I'm so sorry.
I am terribly sorry.
I shouldn't have asked you that.
Please.
Please accept my humblest apology.
Please sit down.
Please.
Let us go back to the chain of events.
Mr. Kinnear left
at three o'clock on Thursday.
Then what happened?
You're both to leave tomorrow.
I'll pay your wages until now.
Mr. Kinnear...
He is not in agreement with this.
-He's said nothing.
-He is in agreement.
Now I've had enough of your face.
Make yourself scarce until you leave.
I'll be glad when you're gone.
I can hardly wait.
I don't believe Mr. Kinnear
knew a thing about it.
As I said, sir, she was in the family way,
and it often happens like that with a man.
They change from a woman
in that condition to one who is not.
It's the same with cows and horses,
and if that happened,
she'd be out on the road,
her and her bastard.
It was plain she wanted me out of the way
and gone before Mr. Kinnear came home.
And what did you do then?
I imagine she won't pay us our wages
and send us off with no reference.
I have a secret.
You must promise not to tell anyone.
-Promise.
-I'm going to kill Nancy with the axe.
I'm gonna shoot Mr. Kinnear when he
comes back and take the valuables.
You'll help if you know
what's good for you.
Otherwise you'll be blamed for it all.
If I hadn't been so upset, I would
have laughed at him, but I did not.
And to tell the truth, we'd both had
a glass or two of Mr. Kinnear's whisky.
Did you believe McDermott
would do as he said?
Not altogether, sir.
On the one hand,
I thought he was just bragging,
which was a thing
he was prone to when drunk.
My own father was the same way.
But on the other hand, he seemed
in earnest and I was afraid of him.
And I had a strong feeling
as if it was fated,
and it couldn't be avoided,
no matter what I did.
Did you not warn anyone?
Nancy herself?
And why would she have believed me, sir?
It would have sounded too stupid
if I said it out loud.
There was only my word for it,
which he could easily deny
and say that I was
nothing but a silly hysterical girl.
At the same time, if he meant it, he might
have killed us both right there and then,
and I did not want to be killed.
The best I could do was try to delay him
until Mr. Kinnear came back.
At first he said he was going to do it
that very night,
and I persuaded him not to.
How did you manage that?
I said that if Nancy was killed
on the Thursday,
that would mean a whole day
of having to account for her whereabouts
to anyone who might enquire.
Whereas if he left it till later, there
would be less suspicion aroused.
I see.
Very sensible.
Please don't make fun of me, sir.
It's very distressing to me,
and doubly so considering
what I'm being asked to remember.
I'm sorry. I didn't mean it that way.
And then what happened?
Nancy came back into the kitchen
as if nothing had happened.
It was always her way
when she was in a temper,
to pretend as if nothing had happened
and we were all the best of friends.
Look at you two,
enjoying the whisky without me.
Let's put out supper as well.
Grace, will you sleep with me tonight?
I'm afraid of burglars.
Let me get my nightdress.
I am going to kill Nancy tonight.
While she is asleep.
Do not do that.
You might hit me by mistake.
I don't want her looking at me
when I do it.
His bed is bigger
and cooler in the warm weather.
And you have a habit of kicking
in your sleep.
He won't find it out.
And even if he did, he'd like the idea
of two maid-servants in his bed at once.
Nancy, McDermott wants to kill you.
I should imagine he does.
I wouldn't mind killing him either.
-He's in earnest.
-He's never in earnest.
He's always bragging and boasting.
It's all just air.
Then there's nothing
I can do to save you.
The window. Fly out the window.
Mary was lost to me once more.
And still I had not let her soul out.
You dreamt that before the event?
Yes, sir. And many times since.
That is why they put me away.
Away?
Into the asylum, sir.
Because of the bad dreams.
Only the dreams?
Only they said they were
not dreams at all, sir.
They said I was awake.
I do not wish to say any more about it.
Alright, Grace. Just continue on.
Perhaps we will come back
to the dreams later.
-Where's Nancy?
-She's probably dressing now.
-Are you going to kill her this morning?
-Yes.
Damn her. I'm gonna take the axe
and knock her on the head.
Surely you will not.
Surely you can't do such a wicked thing.
You think I am a coward?
You will see in a minute what I can do.
For God's sake, don't kill her
in the bedroom.
You'll make the floor all bloody.
What did you say?
It was a foolish thing to say,
but that is what came into my mind.
And it was my job to clean the floors
in that house,
and there was a carpet in Nancy's room.
I'd never tried to get blood
out of a carpet,
but I got it out of other things,
and it's not a task to be sneezed at.
After that I can remember
no more for a time.
Nothing about the cellar?
Nothing about seeing McDermott
dragging Nancy by the trap door
and throwing her down the stairs?
It's in your confession.
That is what they wanted me to say.
The lawyer.
Mr. Mackenzie, he said I had to say it,
to save my own life.
He said it was not a lie, as that
is what must have happened,
whether I could remember it or not.
Did you give James McDermott
the kerchief from around your neck?
The one that was used
to strangle poor Nancy?
It was mine, I know that.
But I have no recollection
of giving it to him.
Nor of being in the cellar?
Nor of helping him to kill her,
nor of wanting to steal
the gold earrings from her corpse,
which he says you wished to do?
All that time is dark to me.
In any case,
there were no gold earrings taken.
I won't say I didn't think of it later,
when we were packing up.
But having a thought
is not the same as doing it.
If we were all on trial for our thoughts,
we would all be hanged.
Well then,
what is the next thing you can remember?
I know you will tell, and if you do,
your life is not worth a straw.
-What have you done?
-You know very well.
You're going to help me kill him.
- Good gracious, McDermott, it is too soon.
- You're gonna help me.
Hello, Grace.
Where's Nancy?
She went to town in the stagecoach.
That is strange. I passed it on the way
and did not see her.
-Would you like something to eat?
-I'd like to show you
the new saddle, Mr. Kinnear.
It's in the stables.
- Open the trap door.
- I won't.
You shall. Grace!
I must have fainted from fear,
because that is all I can remember
until much later in the evening.
Jamie Walsh testified that he came
into the yard about eight o'clock,
which must have been after you fainted.
He said McDermott was still
holding the gun in his hand
and claimed to have been
shooting birds.
I know it, sir.
He said you were standing by the pump.
He said you told him that
Mr. Kinnear was not back yet
and that Nancy had gone to see
some friends.
I cannot account for it, sir.
He said you were in good spirits.
He said you were better dressed than usual
and were wearing white stockings.
He implied they were Nancy's.
James Walsh,
a witness who was acquainted
with the deceased,
claims that the last time
he saw Thomas Kinnear alive
was on the morning of Thursday, July 27,
at about eleven o'clock,
within two miles of his own house,
on his way from town.
By then he had forgot all of
his former loving sentiments towards me
and only wished to damage me,
and have me hanged if possible.
But there is nothing I can do about
what other people say.
Jamie's testimony was the end of me.
The sentence is death by hanging.
I could show you the scar.
Well, Grace, I can see you're tired.
We will continue with your story tomorrow.
Yes, sir.
I hope I will have the strength.
Sooner or later,
we will get to the bottom of it.
I hope so, sir.
It would be a relief to me, sir,
to know the whole truth at last.
What were you expecting today
that you didn't get?
The missing memory, of course.
Those few crucial hours.
Has she refused to talk?
She has told me a great deal.
But only what she's chosen to tell.
What I want is what she refuses to tell,
what she chooses to perhaps not even know.
Do you mean knowledge of guilt?
Or of innocence?
Either could be concealed.
-She could be a true amnesiac.
-That is our strong feeling on the matter.
Or she could be simply guilty.
She could be insane
with the devious plausibility
of the experienced maniac.
Perhaps...
and I say this with delicacy...
perhaps we should consider Jerome DuPont's
neuro-hypnotic experiment.
-No. I distrust the method.
-Under your guidance, of course.
I see that you want her pardoned
as much as we do.
We need this report
to be favorable to Grace Marks
if we want her pardoned.
Dark.
We then commenced packing up
all the valuable things we could find.
We both went down into the cellar.
Mr. Kinnear was lying on his back
in the cellar.
I held the candle.
McDermott took the keys
and some money from his pockets.
Nothing was said about Nancy.
Around eleven o'clock,
we started off for Toronto.
We will go to the States
and I will marry you.
Oh no.
Oh, no no no.
I have to go to Toronto. For work.
-Please. Please don't.
-Please, I must.
You didn't come today, Dr. Jordan.
So I must go on
with the story without you.
I must prepare what I will tell you
when you return.
There is, of course,
James McDermott's version.
He said I was pleased to see him.
He said we drank a shot of whisky
to steady us and clinked our glasses
and drank to the success of our venture.
I could not have acted so heartlessly
with Mr. Kinnear lying dead in the cellar.
Not to mention Nancy,
who must have been dead too.
But McDermott was a great liar.
What I remember is waking up
to a beautiful night.
I was in Nancy's clothes.
And I looked up at the sky, which seemed
so close I could touch it.
I thought the sky was only a thin surface,
like paper, and it was being singed away.
And behind it was a cold blackness.
And it was not Heaven or even Hell
that I was looking at, but only emptiness.
This was more frightening
than anything I could think of
and I prayed silently to God
to forgive my sins.
But what if there were no God
to forgive me?
And then I reflected that perhaps it was
the outer darkness,
with the wailing and the gnashing
of teeth, where God was not.
What do you mean, causing such an uproar?
Do you want us to be discovered?
Get off. Let me up at once.
You asked me to stop the wagon!
You invited me onto your shawl
like the hot bitch you are.
I did no such thing.
I was sound asleep!
I will not be made a fool of,
you demon slut, you led me on.
You enticed me...
and caused me to damn my soul
into the bargain,
forcing me to kill those two.
Crocodile tears
will not avail you this time.
I have had a bellyful.
You bit me, you whore!
So you are a good girl after all.
I'll wait until I've married you.
It's more proper.
I was just testing you.
Here. We'll have breakfast
before the ferry leaves.
-I'm starved with hunger.
-It's 5 a.m. They won't be awake.
We will rouse them
and make them cook us breakfast.
We should wait until people are about.
Otherwise we will be noticeable.
Why must you always be arguing with me?
I've got money
which is as good as the next man's.
If I want a breakfast and I can
pay for it, then I will have it.
It is remarkable, I have since thought,
how once a man has a few coins,
no matter how he came by them, he thinks
right away he is entitled to them,
and to whatever they can buy,
and fancies himself cock of the walk.
My egg is not cooked enough!
Take it back to the kitchen
and make me another.
Are those Mr. Kinnear's boots?
Did you take them off the body?
Yes.
How could you do such a thing?
What do you mean?
You're wearing Nancy's dress yourself.
It's not the same thing.
I must have left my white kerchief behind.
The one with the blue flowers?
Yes.
I don't know where I left it; I need it
for the ferry to keep the sun off my neck.
It is keeping the sun off Nancy's neck.
You ought to remember,
seeing as you yourself pulled it tight
and tied the knot.
I did not wish to contradict him, as it is
dangerous to contradict mad people.
I forgot.
I'm gonna change my clothes,
because if people come asking for us,
it might throw them off.
I've done all of this for you.
Because you asked me.
Because you said that you would be mine.
We must hang together
or we will hang separately.
I thought I should tell someone.
But there is something despicable
about betrayal.
I'd felt McDermott's heart beating
next to mine, and however undesired,
still it was a human heart.
I did not wish to have any part
in stilling it forever,
unless I should be forced to it.
The Bible says,
"Vengeance is mine, sayeth the Lord."
I did not feel it was my place to take
such a serious thing
as vengeance into my own hands.
And so I stayed where I was
until he came back.
Pardon me, miss.
What is your name?
Mary Whitney.
-Stop it. We must not arouse suspicion.
-We are in a foreign country now.
We're safe.
That never stopped slavers from seizing
runaway slaves they said were theirs.
We arrived at Lewiston
about three o'clock.
-We'll be married soon enough anyway.
-We will not.
I'd sooner marry the Devil himself
than you.
I'll have my promise off you anyway.
I will scream,
which will be a different thing
in a tavern than in a house
with only two corpses.
For God's sake, shut your mouth, you slut.
You stupid whore.
Think of some new words to use
because I am heartily tired of those.
I told myself they would let me be free
if I told the whole story.
Or as much of it as I could remember.
♪ Come all you fair ♪
♪ And tender girls ♪
♪ That flourish in your prime ♪
♪ Prime ♪
♪ Beware, beware ♪
♪ If you're good and fair ♪
♪ Let no man steal your time ♪
♪ Time ♪
♪ Let no man steal ♪
♪ Your time ♪